[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. [music] I'm
Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, we're in Boston.
>> I know. Uh we've never done an OddLotss
thing in Boston of any sort, have we?
>> No. Uh, this is actually my first time
in Boston. I've been to the airport a
few times, but I've never actually
stayed in the city. And everything I
know about Boston comes from the Boston,
New York rivalry as depicted in 30 Rock.
So, I know nothing [laughter] basically,
>> you know. And um, and I lived in Vermont
for several years in high school. Boston
that was the big city like people and
like people aspired to go to Boston. I
knew went to I knew a lot of people went
to college here and stuff like that. I
love it here. I'm excited to be here.
You know, the big city closest to my
house in Connecticut is Worcester,
Massachusetts. That's the big one.
That's a nice city, too.
>> It's about 40 minutes away. So,
>> all right. Well, the reason we are here
is for the Boston Fed, which is holding
their 69th economic conference, and the
theme of this year's is the US economy
in a changing global landscape, which is
putting it mildly. I think
>> it is uh putting it mildly. There's
there's a lot going on globally. All
kinds of things. You could just run down
the list. We don't even have to
summarize it, but it is a a time of
change both macro big picture globally,
but also just for the near-term
direction of monetary policy right now
in the United States, probably as
ambiguous as it's been in a while.
>> Yeah, I think so. And we're seeing that
reflected in a lot of the Fed speak
that's been coming out at the moment. We
have doves on the one side who are
talking about a deteriorating labor
market and then we have hawks on the
other side who are still very concerned
that basically after 5 years of
inflation we have still not returned to
the 2% target. It's been half a decade
>> right and as of right now recording this
November 19th 2025 the warp function uh
looking at Fed fund futures gives about
a 45% chance of a rate cut in December
that was in the high 60s just a couple
of weeks ago. So, a lot of things, a lot
of uncertainty, more or less a coin flip
right now. We don't know what's going on
in the medium-term or the long term.
>> I'm going to say one more thing before
we get to our very esteemed guest, but
there is another complication, which is
we've had the government shutdown,
right? So, we haven't had a lot of the
economic data. By the time this episode
comes out, there might have been some of
the economic data, but we also have Fed
minutes that are due out later today.
But to emphasize, as of this morning,
everything is very, very uncertain.
>> Uh, the fog, that's like the term
everyone's using.
>> Yeah, there's a little bit of fog out in
the Boston Harbor right now as well. So,
uh, fog, fog everywhere. Okay, so
without further ado, we have the perfect
guest to talk about the changing US
economic landscape and what it means for
monetary policy. We're going to be
speaking with Boston Fed President Susan
Collins. So, Susan, thank you so much
for coming on All Thoughts. I am
delighted to be here and welcome to
Boston.
>> Thank you so much. I heard I'm supposed
to eat beans and lobster. Is that right?
All right, I'll do that later.
>> Okay, perfect. So, tell us firstly about
this research conference. What's the
purpose of the Fed gathering people
together to talk about, you know, you
have a series of papers here all with
different themes and topics. Why do
this?
>> Sure. happy to talk about our conference
and I have to say I and our entire team
are delighted that you are both going to
be joining us for our day and a half
conference.
>> We can't we can't say no to a conference
full of academic economic papers.
>> Lots of PDFs to read. [laughter]
>> Well, it will be quite u meaty and
informative. You know, it's not just
academics and that's one of the things
that I think is really important to us
and and one of the things that makes it
particularly valuable. So we bring
together and this is the 69th Boston
conference. It's our flagship. You know
we do other meetings and conferences and
other things but this one is our
flagship and we bring together academics
certainly. We bring together policy
makers from different institutions. We
bring together business leaders. We have
a wide range of people. We actually have
people from different disciplines. So
one of the papers is from a political
scientist as well. So, so that is is
kind of a hallmark of the conference is
to really do a deep dive to understand
dimensions of a topic. And we picked a
pretty big one this time. So, I'm not
going to suggest we're going to cover
the entire thing, but understanding the
US economy in what is a changing global
landscape related to risks and
uncertainties to fragmentation. It's a
lot to talk about and I'm really looking
forward to being part of it, to learning
and to hearing the presentations.
>> I don't want to like create any tension
between you and the fellow regional Fed
presidents, but doesn't it feel like
Kansas City cheats a little bit by
having their [laughter] conference in
Wyoming and August, etc. Like,
>> we're in Boston in November,
>> which is great. And it's lovely here.
And it's lovely.
>> What's wrong with Boston in November?
But I just I [laughter] always feel like
it's kind of cheating that's like, "Oh,
we're not even going to have it in our
in the exact location and we're going to
have it some in the middle of summer in
this beautiful location." It is kind of
cheating a little.
>> Well, you know, the Jackson Hall
conference is a very special one. I have
been participating in that for a long
time and I'm a huge proponent and I just
say the more the marrier. You know, it's
a lot to talk about.
>> A positive abundance mindset for
conference.
>> That's right. That's right. So, let's
talk actually, you know, we'll get into
we want to talk about some of the big
themes. We want to talk, let's talk a
little bit of near-term monetary policy,
etc. Odds of a December cut have come in
dramatically because you and some of the
other members of the FOMC have been
talking about this concern that
inflation remains stubbornly overtarget.
That being said, there does seem to be a
lot of evidence of labor market
weakening, right? and we haven't got the
unemployment rate for a while, but
basically every measure seems to show a
significant I don't know stall, etc.
Talk to us about your read on the labor
market right now. Are you concerned that
some of the weakness that we've seen
could snowball into seriously
deteriorating environment and a sharp
increase in the unemployment rate?
>> Yeah. So, I appreciate your framing of
that. I I you know I have to start by
saying I'm really focused on both parts
of our mandate and that does mean the
labor market say more about that in just
a hot second but also concerns about the
elevated inflation and what I hear about
that and our commitment to price
stability. So, you know, they both
really matter and I'm looking at both of
them that that's really what I've been
emphasizing. As far as the labor market,
you know, it it's kind of a an unusual
situation in some ways, right? I mean
what I think is pretty clear is that we
have seen softening in the labor market.
We are pulling together all the data
that we can find but as you pointed out
earlier we don't have the official data
yet. We'll get a jobs report from
September tomorrow morning and really
eager to see that. And so it's hard to
tell how much that softening has been
but I do think it's clear it reflects
both labor supply growth having slowed
pretty notably but also labor demand
growth. And so so far it seems and again
we'll learn more that there's a kind of
rough unusual balance there and so we
haven't seen a significant unemployment
change but that's something I'm watching
really carefully and I'm really attuned
to.
>> Just to follow up though on we have not
seen a significant unemployment change
setting aside the data which is going to
be noisy for all kinds of reasons
because that's September which is ages
ago and then the date after that will be
you know affected by the government
shutdown itself which is why we're
weren't getting data. So, who knows how
long it'll be until we have clean data.
But that being said, do you have any way
to like anticipate actual deterioration?
Because the concern is that once the
unemployment, the layoffs really start
to snowball, then they start to feed on
each other and they build they
accelerate and people talk about
nonlinearity potential. Do you are you
concerned that by waiting or too much
for the data to reveal oh the weakness
is here that you won't have been able to
get around get in front of a
deterioration.
>> It's really important to be
forward-looking and as you say I also
have seen past episodes where there's
been a dynamic which can move quickly
and so it's important to recognize that.
So are there risks on the labor market
side? Absolutely. and that's something
that I'm attuned to. But that's not the
only consideration in terms of making
monetary policy decisions. It's really
about balancing those risks and looking
at to the best of one's ability. You
know, how do you assess which of our
goals from Congress is further away? And
I think that the reasons that you're
talking about some of that shift in
risks increase in risks in the labor
market was a good reason for the easing
the 50% basis point cuts that we have
already done this fall. And I think that
that has actually positioned us given
what I know now and obviously still
watching lots of caveats. And so I I
think that that the shift in that
balance of risks that I started being
quite focused on over the summer was
really a rationale for those cuts that
we've already seen. At the same time, we
have now moved much closer to a neutral
rate and we're balancing
those risks on the labor market side
with continued risks related to
inflation and elevation and policy is
really only mildly restrictive in my
view. And so I given what I'm seeing so
far continue to see that as appropriate
for now. We're going to get into each
one of those points, but I have a very
quick process question. And I realize
we're in unusual circumstances at the
moment, but when the jobs number hits
presumably tomorrow on Thursday, again,
we're, you know, we're recording this on
Wednesday, November 19th, but when it
comes out, what actually happens? What
do you do when when you see that number?
Do you, you know, immediately go into
analysis mode? Do you start calling
fellow Fed presidents and talking about
what it means? What do you what? Hey,
that's a great question. So, you know,
of course, we have busy schedules and
all kinds of other things going on and
sometimes when the data hits, I'm in
other meetings or with other groups. I
am well aware of when it is due and we
do have a process. I have a very strong
Boston research team of experts and so
you know as soon as the numbers come out
I do try to take a quick look at them
and then we are sometimes uh virtually
and you know get together relatively
quickly to assess what we're seeing in
those numbers so I have help to try to
unpack them. Often the real information
is in the details. It's not necessarily
just the headline number. In fact, that
can mask a lot of what's really
interesting about the information. We
then take some time to unpack it and we
want to contrast those data with what we
had already seen, right? Because you're
adding new information. It's not going
onto a kind of totally clean pallet,
right? It's additional information. So
we are doing all of that and I'm working
with my team and then I do of course
talk to my colleagues as well but the
immediate analysis is more within our
teams in each of our reserve banks.
>> And one more process question but it
strikes me that one of the unusual
features of our very unusual environment
at the moment is just the sheer amount
of Fed speakers that we've had in recent
days. I started counting them up
yesterday and I got nine in less than a
week. And I think then our friend Tom
Barkin, friend of the pod, put out a
speech or a research note as well. So
that brings it up to 10 in less than a
week. What's going on? Why does everyone
have the urge to sort of stake their
ground ahead of a meeting that you know
the market currently implies could be a
coin flip? Well, all the more reason to
hear range of views. I mean, I think one
of the strengths of the structure of our
federated system is it really does bring
different viewpoints. And you know, it's
interesting because sometimes there's a
claim that there's too much group think.
I don't see group think. I see this
week. No, I really don't. And so, I
think we have also a responsibility to
explain what we're seeing, how we're
thinking about things. And that's part
of that communication that we do. And
and so I I actually think that's
important. And I think recognizing that
the breadth of views is partly us coming
together is sharing information and is
part of that process. So there there
different windows when I think you hear
lots of speeches. This is certainly not
an isolated time but it's when there's
you know kind of less clarity perhaps
when they're turning points in the
economy when you're more likely to see
many of us out there talking about what
we're seeing. also talking about how our
regional information contributes to that
in different ways. And we're often
talking while we're out in our regions
connecting with different people. And so
there's kind of multiple dimensions
about why we're out and about and what
we're doing.
[music]
Let's talk about inflation. So core PCE
as of the August reading, which again
feels like ages ago now, but it's the
data that we have. So that came in at
2.9%. So that's clearly elevated solidly
above target. You know, if you just had
like a snapshot, you're looking at the
unemployment rate, you're looking at the
inflation reading, that 2.9%.
How much does the significance of that
change because it comes after years of
missing the inflation target to the
upside versus if we just had the
snapshot? Like, how much of your
thinking is sort of informed by the fact
that not only has it been high, but it's
been high for a really long time? I do
think that the longevity of that
elevation is a key factor to to figure.
It's hard to you know to put a
particular weight on that but
>> you think about the balance of risks
going forward.
>> Yeah. Yeah. But so let me say a few
things on the inflation side. First
related to that specific question, you
know, I do think that it is a bit of a
reminder that it's economic behavior
that is not, you know, 100% predictable
and many of our analyses that are based
on periods when people were really used
to very low inflation, maybe a bit
noisier signals of what kind of
responses and changes we're going to
see. And so I do think that
complementing those analyses, you know,
of course those are extremely valuable
and we continue to look at we're total
we're all data geeks here, you know,
that's that's kind of what we do with
the conversations we have understanding
how businesses are thinking about
things. And so I hear that businesses
are mindful that they have raised prices
significantly over recent years. They're
concerned about what consumer responses
will be. I've recently been hearing a
number of firms at least in the New
England district, the Boston Feds
district, which is most of New England,
saying that that they have been passing
price increases and they have been
perhaps surprised in some cases that
consumers are not pushing back and
that's leading them to expect that they
might continue to do that, you know. So
I think that gathering a range of
information to complement how what our
understanding of behavior is important
and that does factor into some of the
scenarios I think are plausible. They're
not necessarily my baseline. My baseline
scenario on the inflation side is that
inflation's likely, I think, to stay
elevated through the rest of this year
into early next and then as tariffs work
their way through the system, which I
think is going to take some time and I'm
happy to talk more about tariffs.
Suspect we may want to come back to
that.
>> Absolutely.
>> You know, I think that the disinflation
process perhaps slow and uneven that we
had seen earlier is likely to kick in.
So, so, so my baseline is a relatively
benign one both on the inflation side
and on the real side of the economy, but
I don't rule out scenarios where there's
a larger increase in inflation where
there's more persistence. And some of
that has to do with behavioral responses
that might reflect
having been in an elevated environment
for a long time and concerns about
profit margins, concerns about, you
know, catching up to some of the past
changes and how people think about price
levels, which is something that many of
our models are not as focused on. I hear
a lot about price levels when I'm out
and about, but high cost of living,
housing in particular, but not only
child care, food, that that is the
number one challenge that I hear about
when I'm talking to people, particularly
low and moderate income communities, but
not only. So, since we're at a research
conference at the Boston Fed, I need to
bring up a really good research paper
that came out of the Boston Fed back in
October, I think, and it was looking at
inflation expectations now and comparing
them to what happened in the early and
late 1970s. And the finding was that the
rise in inflation expectations around CO
might not have had that much to do with
actual prices but actually outran the
prices and sort of became deankored a
little bit from reality which is what we
saw in the the late 1970s.
is the concern that people, you know,
after five years of above target
inflation, after price levels going up,
as you just put it, that our
expectations for inflation start to
become unmed from reality. Is that the
nightmare scenario for you at the
moment?
>> It certainly would be a concern if I
were to see evidence that especially
medium to longer term inflation
expectations were becoming unmed. I'm
not seeing that right now, but it is
something I watch carefully. And I do
think that at least certainly so far and
my baseline as I said is on the more
benign side, you know, is not expecting
that that would happen. In particular,
we're not seeing those labor market
pressures with a softer labor market,
but is it a concern? Is it something to
watch carefully? It is, and you know,
uh, it's something that I know some are
more concerned about than others. Well,
talk to us about how tariffs play into
inflation expectations because this
seems to be a difficult one to call. You
have the initial rise in prices and then
no one is quite sure what happens after
that. The consensus seems to be that
it's this one-off shift and then, you
know, inflation should start to cool.
But on the other hand, we're hearing a
lot from consumers, as you say, about
price levels themselves.
So, quite a bit to say about tariffs.
So, you know, let me unpack a few of the
things that are really top of mind for
me. One is when certainly when I say
that, you know, my baseline expectation
would be that tariffs have a one-time
impact on prices, one time doesn't mean
it just happens in a week and it's done.
That one time can get implemented over
months, a year, something like that. It
just says that it's not expected to be a
continual increase. Once the level has
adjusted, you don't get additional
impacts. But that can happen over time.
So that's one point. And I do think that
in a period of high uncertainty and the
tariffs are really intertwined with
uncertainty, something to come back to
and the long elevation of higher prices
that we were just talking about. you
might actually expect the time for
businesses to pass things through to be
elongated,
>> right? And and so then you start
worrying more that people get used to
these continual price increases and you
kind of get stuck, right? So that's a
scenario again, not my baseline, but is
one that I think one could think about.
So a few things about tariffs. One is
the tariffs are really intertwined with
uncertainty which makes you know it's
uncertainty about the tariffs which is
one of the key things that's having
influence for example in terms of hiring
decisions investment decisions some of
the reticence that firms have to make
major decisions and projects and also in
terms of teasing out empirically right
it's going to take some time our staff
at the Boston Fed is doing quite a bit
of work on a variety of dimensions and
That includes analysis that takes into
account that you know many of the
tariffs are impacting imported
intermediates and so there multiple
dimensions and levels and you got to
take all of that into account and we're
also doing a lot of analysis on what
happened in 2018. What can we learn from
that? Because we've had enough time
that's elapsed. And actually, one of the
papers at our conference will be drawing
some of the lessons from a kind of more
comprehensive analysis of that
experience. You know, just one thing
that they've already been talking about
is then was a much smaller tariff
increase. It was narrower and it was
implemented over a relatively short time
period. It still took five months or
more before the peak impact on price
levels was seen. And there reasons to
think it might take even longer this
time. And then the survey data, and
we're doing survey data at the Boston
Fed, particularly focused on small
businesses, which isn't a group we don't
have as much line of sight into, and the
conversations that I've talked about,
that helps to inform things. And then
just one final thing because I think is
both intellectually interesting, you
know, if I put my academic hat on, but
also really important. We've also seen
significant increases in productivity
and that is interacting with some of the
tariffs perhaps offsetting the extent to
which we're seeing the impacts of
tariffs on prices because productivity
growth is actually an opportunity not to
pass things through because it enables
you know cost savings etc. So there's a
lot of things going on with tariffs
which make them hard. I think this is
going to be a area we will be able to uh
we will continue studying and learning
about for some time to come.
>> I like your characterization of I guess
maybe you'd call it like the long
oneoff, right? There can be a one-off,
but it doesn't just mean the price level
resets from today to tomorrow. It could
just be the sort of long process where
some new equilibrium is formed, maybe
months, maybe years, etc. I'm really
interested though in those conversations
that you have with New England
businesses about tariffs. You mentioned
perhaps some of their surprise that they
were able to pass on price increases to
the degree that they have. What else are
companies saying about sort of the
operational effects, the day-to-day
effects of how they're managing their
business in light of tariffs? What
substantive things do you hear about?
>> So, a number of different number of
different things. A lot of the tariff
conversations that I've had really are
intertwined with navigating uncertainty.
So, one of the things that, you know,
I've heard is it's challenging to
navigate and make adjustments based on a
very different tariff level. But if we
knew exactly what it was and it was
going to stay there, that would be much
easier to adjust to than back and forth
and uncertainty. And that creates some
hesitancy. It also creates or adds to
because I think this was already there
what I'm calling almost an efficiency
mindset where firms are reticent to hire
because they're not sure how things are
evolving and tariffs are you know a cost
increase to the extent that you can
offset that through efficiencies
that is one way forward that is almost
kind of like a no regrets type of
investment because whatever happens with
the tariffs if you found efficiency
improvements that will have been a
helpful kind of context. So that links
up with AI but it's certainly not only
AI it's production processes it's
automation it's addressing some
longerstanding areas where it was
difficult to hire because of skilled
shortages. So a number of things that I
have been hearing since I started in the
role in 2022 continue
and then there's this additional set of
things that are added on. So for many
businesses especially the larger ones I
actually hear some kind of cautious
optimism as they look out ahead. It
depends somewhat on the sector. there
somewhat some differences and it depends
what some of the global linkages are and
some of those other competitive effects
but I've heard quite a bit of that and a
bit more stress and concern among some
of the uh smaller firms in some places
and so that's part of why we're trying
to add to the information there through
a quarterly small business survey that
we started doing recently.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I hesitate to ask too many theoreticals
here, but I think this has actually
become less of a theoretical recently,
but the there is a good chance that the
Supreme Court strikes down a big chunk
of these tariffs. How would you as a
policy maker actually deal with, you
know, the approximate cause of this
one-time shift of inflation suddenly
being put in doubt? And then on top of
that, you also have more uncertainties
on the margin about whether or not
people might get tariff bonuses and then
whether or not businesses would receive
refund checks if the tariffs were, you
know, struck down by the Supreme Court.
That seems like a very complicated
scenario to be thinking about and much
less planning for there is considerable
uncertainty in this space as you just
pointed out and you know I don't know
how things will unfold and for some of
those things I think recognizing the
uncertainty and making assessments based
on the things that we know to some
extent looking at scenario planning but
some of the really hard to figure it out
how things would unfold. It may not be
helpful to get too far ahead of that.
So, you know, again to your point,
>> the uncertainty remains elevated. Maybe
the nature of the uncertainty is shifted
in some ways and it's something that I
think firms, households, local
governments are are navigating.
>> Quick question. Even with this the
slowdown in hiring etc. and the sort of
big changes to the labor market in the
last few years. Do you still regularly
hear about skilled labor shortages?
>> I do in some sectors and some areas and
and let me give you a couple of
examples. So for, you know, parts of New
England, New England is actually aging
faster than the rest of the country.
That's one of our distinguishing
features. We're, you know, quite
seasoned and we have many wonderful
advantages. And so there are places
where there is more of almost a labor
shortage. there's some skilled areas
where firms continue to tell me maybe
it's gotten a bit easier, but it's still
challenging to hire for certain kinds of
of trades. And so, one of the things
that I've been really inspired to see
are innovative collaborations. So for
example in eastern Connecticut related
to skilled manufacturing pulling private
sector together with you know higher
education and support across local
public sector bringing people together
to solve those problems and to identify
pipelines and you know the Cape Cod
Community College has one too. They're
training aviation technology
maintenance. they have a new uh
relatively new program which will soon I
believe be the biggest in the country
and that is an area where there is a
skilled shortage nationally. So there
are shortages in some areas and there
also initiatives to try to address them
which I find inspiring. So I certainly
take your point obviously that you have
to the Fed has to be or ought to be very
mindful of the fact that inflation is
still above target and that there are
scenarios even if they're not your base
case we're going to become a real
problem. That being said you know at
what point is it worth cutting even if
inflation is above target? Where is the
labor market weakness have to get to say
you know what we're not back to 2% but
we have a real problem on the labor
market side that that becomes the
priority. So there clearly, as I
mentioned before, there clearly does
need to be a balance of those risks. And
so I do think about how far each of our
dualmandated goals is from the target.
>> And so if the
>> famous unemployment doesn't have one
like we have with we have that nice 2%
number on the inflation side.
>> Yeah. So that's that is a you know a
little bit less specifically concrete
than inflation. Absolutely. But I do
think that we have a sense of what full
employment looks like. And you know this
something we talked about as part of the
framework review that was completed
recently that you know describes that as
the maximum employment that you can
sustain over time that's consistent with
price stability. And I think that's a
helpful way of thinking about it because
it also evolves over time. It's not just
one number. And I think it's appropriate
to think about it that way. So if we
were seeing evidence, if I were seeing
evidence that the labor market were
notably deteriorating, I would take that
very seriously and that certainly could
justify, you know, near-term additional
easing. And so I, you know, careful to
kind of qualify my statements based on
what I'm seeing at the moment that it is
based on balancing risks. But I think
it's important not to forget about the
real concerns related to the inflation
side as well as staying very attentive
to what's happening on the labor market
side. And you know with much slower
labor demand, much lower hiring, even
though the labor supply growth is
clearly much lower as well, there is a
risk that the demand would fall well
below the supply growth and we would
start to see more notable unemployment
increases. So something to watch very
carefully and the data from September
that we'll get tomorrow is helpful. you
know, the initial claims unemployment,
the other information that many of us
are gathering and looking at is helpful
as well, but you know, that's still from
September and so there's more
information to come. So, one thing I'm
wondering about the labor market and you
know, we've heard the supply argument,
um, you know, the break even rate
argument from a number of Fed policy
makers at this point, but if supply in
the labor market is the issue here
because of immigration or whatever, and
it's about that supply rather than a
deterioration in demand, shouldn't we
have expected to see some tightness
showing up in other statistics like
wages earned,
has worked the quits rate something like
that and we haven't really seen that
yet.
>> So I think it's both.
>> Okay.
>> Right. I mean the fact I don't think we
are seeing significant wage pressures.
>> I think that's been true for a while. I
think if anything the more recent data
I've seen but again you know don't have
the most recent information you know has
come down a bit. It's been higher than
it was pre- pandemic. At the same time,
given the productivity that we'd seen,
that is consistent in my view with, you
know, with with price stability. So, I
have not been as concerned about the
labor market and that speaks to both
demand and supply having come down,
which is this kind of unusual balance
that I was talking about before.
>> I see.
>> But looking out ahead, it's hard to
really project what those trajectories
will be. Will the labor demand fall more
quickly than the supply has fallen? Then
you'd start to see the unemployment go
up. But of course, it was the other way
around. You tend to see more wage
pressures.
>> Let's talk about AI for a second. What
is what do the businesses that you're
talking to say about their I don't know
adoption, implementation, investment in
AI? I'm all, you know, clearly it feels
like everyone is experimenting
everything. It's very hard to detect
whether there are obvious productivity
gains being seen perhaps outside of
coding and engineering. What are they
telling you about their sort of their
budgets and their plans for adoption of
this technology?
>> Yeah, you know, so if I think back even
six months, it was a a kind of
interesting piece of the conversation
that I would have when I'm meeting with
a group of different business leaders
from different sectors. It's now a
significant share of the conversation
and typically there's not one of the
people around the table who isn't
telling me how they're thinking about
it, what they're doing, what they're
finding. It's out there. It's
everywhere. And that's true, you know.
So, I was not too long ago visiting a
lumber mill in northern Vermont and
learned about how they have been using
AI in order to sort planks in part
because they were having trouble hiring
that skilled labor in that part of the
country. But then they told me about all
of the other benefits they were finding
and ways that they were teaching it to
do additional things. I hadn't expected
going to a lumber mill that we were
going to spend quite a bit of time
talking about AI. So it's much broader.
I am hearing that there are some ways
that the AI is really supporting workers
and enabling them to do more and be more
focused, saving time in terms of
reporting and a variety of different
back office kinds of things. I have some
people telling me that they actually
expected it'll enable them to grow
because of some of the savings in ways
that they're excited about. and then
others that are telling me that it may
be enabling them to downsize. I think
it's still early days and there many
many different dimensions and there's
still a lot of experimentation to your
point. So I'm hearing all of it. It's
really interesting and I think it's much
too early to tell how it's all going to
play out.
>> I hate to ask another theoretical
question but I apologize in advance
because
>> it's a research. We're here for a
research conference.
>> Why not? But when you think about AI,
does it make you think about the
unemployment side of the mandate and you
know the policym capacity at the Fed?
And what I mean by that is, you know,
traditionally you lower interest rates
if you want to try to boost employment
and that's supposed to encourage
businesses to invest in new capital and
historically a lot of that capital has
meant additional jobs, although we can
debate automation and all of that. But
when it comes to AI, you lower interest
rates, people invest in AI, and I think
the concern is that means fewer jobs.
Now, how do you think about that as
someone at the Fed whose primary tool is
the benchmark rate? Lots of pieces to
that and a lot of thinking going on,
right? So, let me just let me say a
couple of things. So, I do think that
even though you know we're mildly
restrictive, we are seeing considerable
investments across a wide range of firms
and sectors in AI. That is one of the
things that firms are clearly leaning
into. And you know I do think of AI as a
general purpose technology which is like
the internet or like electricity. And if
you go back in history in those when
those were being adopted there was also
discussion that introduction of those
new technologies was going to you know
just really eliminate a huge number of
jobs. and what other people lighting gas
lamps who are going to be unemployed
electricity
>> and gas you know and other things were
developed and some of them we don't
we're not imagining yet so I do think
that that history is important at the
same time it does seem potentially like
this general purpose technology might
unfold more quickly and that could
create more transition challenges again
it's really early days in terms of
thinking about how that may play out but
I am expecting there'll be new
opportunities and new you know I mean
when women join the labor market the
view was that will mean there were no
jobs for men and therefore you know and
obviously what we've seen is a
significant increase in job
opportunities vibrancy and the US
economy is a vibrant dynamic economy in
a number of different ways but early
days important to play out the other
thing I will say is there are a lot of
things the Fed focuses on and cares
deeply about because they impact
economic conditions. They impact
employment. They impact inflation. We
need to understand them. We need to
follow them, but they aren't the direct
thing that our policy tools are able to
influence. And so, I think we need to
kind of recognize and separate those
things. You know, one reason to have,
you know, eased a bit is it could
facilitate an environment where it's
easier for labor to make transitions to
to different kind of areas and places.
So I think there are lots of
considerations there but again this
one's going to unfold over some period
of time.
>> You know one of the things you mentioned
is people don't just care about the rate
of inflation they care about
affordability overall. So the price
level which has gone up very
significantly and one segment of
people's consumption basket that's gone
up a lot in several years the cost of
housing and so forth. And this is
something that comes up from time to
time, which is that rate policy when it
comes to housing can sort of cut in
multiple directions because higher
interest rates might, you know, make
mortgages more costly and you get a
depression a little bit in demand and
maybe that helps balance prices. On the
other hand, that could also curtail
development and developers are very
attuned to the interest rates. We have
seen a lot of measures of housing starts
come down, housing activity, etc. How do
you think about getting that balance
right and this particularly given the
salience of residents when it comes to
the price level etc. How do you think
about optimal policy for housing supply?
>> Yeah, housing is really important for a
variety of reasons. It is one of the
most frequent concerns that I hear not
just for lower moderate income, right? I
mean the accessibility availability is
much broader than that. So you know it
matters in terms of economic vibrancy
individuals households it matters in
terms of it can be a barrier to
participating in the economy right so I
worry about that from that standpoint we
got in the
>> context that we're in now with real
challenges with affordability and there
are lots of statistics that demonstrate
the lack of housing and affordability
challenges over a long period of time
and it's going to take a number of
different groups working together to be
able to really address them. So, you
know, it is true that in the short run
higher interest rates do have an impact.
At the same time, of course, the shorter
the longer term rates that are often
relevant there are influenced by a
number of different factors. I would say
importantly guess two just quick things.
One is that restoring and maintaining
price stability and maximum employment
creates an environment that's really
conducive to addressing our housing
challenges and sustaining that
environment, that infrastructure over
time. And so it's, you know, it's
maintaining that broader environment
that I think is what Congress has
charged us to do and that will create
that environment. The other thing is
that, you know, as a nonpartisan,
trusted data geekish resource, the Fed
can help to be bring different groups
together to share information to help be
a convenor. The Boston Fed hosted a
conference this summer with the Harvard
uh center on housing studies that put
out their annual report and we had our
colleagues from eight different reserve
banks. All of us are engaged and
interested in working in our communities
to support addressing the housing
challenges. So, it's top of mind and
there are things that we can influence
and then there's some things that of
course we cannot. We've been talking a
lot about the economy for obvious
reasons, but I am aware that we are in
Boston and you are the Boston Fed
president and if there's one thing I do
know about the city is that it is a
financial center. There are a lot of
financial firms, especially on the buy
side over here. Can I ask very quickly,
how much have you been watching the
markets and reflecting on what's been
going on there? Because of course, we've
had lots of talk about an AI bubble,
although maybe some of the air has been
kicked out of that bubble's tires in
recent days and weeks. But we also have
some strains in the funding markets. You
know, we've seen some curles to put it
mildly in repo and things like that. Are
you watching those as well as what's
happening with the broader economy?
>> Absolutely. So you know our teams are
also very carefully watching
developments in financial markets and
you know we are seeing some more
volatility certainly you know compared
to the beginning of the year markets are
still up but spreads are still
relatively low and so there are a number
of things to be focused on and to be
aware of as we think about our broader
responsibilities and charge.
>> All right Susan Collins Boston Fed
president. We're going to try to grab
you later at the conference [laughter]
after the jobs numbers come out and see
if anything's changed. But thank you so
much for coming on All Bots. Really
appreciate it. A pleasure. We're
delighted you're here.
[music]
Joe, I really enjoyed that conversation.
I think it is such an interesting time
to be talking with anyone on the Fed. I
guess I'm still trying to wrap my head
around whether the division among policy
makers currently whether it's about how
they see the state of the economy right
now because actually there does seem to
be a lot of consensus like the labor
market is deteriorating and inflation
you know you can't deny that it is above
target or whether it's about which side
of the mandate they want to emphasize or
whether it's about which side of the
mandate has the potential to get out of
hand basically and you know either rise
or decrease exponentially the inflation
rate or the unemployment rate. Yeah, I
think that's a that's a very good way of
summarizing why there is so much debate
and disagreement because a look again
even setting aside the data blackout
from the official sources there's
confusion but then you add in the data
blackout and then the questions about
>> look I mean the labor market r the risk
to the labor market is that sort of
nonlinearity right that you get an
increase and then an increase and then
an increase and then suddenly you have
very severe unemployment you're very far
away from your mandate. The risk to the
inflation is that yeah, as as Susan and
others have noted, they've been missing
for a long time. They're still not back
to their target. Even in Susan's base
case, they don't get back to their
target for a while. And there are
concerns about something more deeper
becoming embedded. I thought it was very
interesting that she said that the
contacts that she talked to have been
surprised by the degree to which they
could pass price in this environment.
And so yeah, very easy to see all the
different ways that you could derive
uncertainty. Not to mention the fact
that policy itself, the fiscal policy
through tariffs and so forth remains
uncertain there.
>> Absolutely. I thought it was also really
interesting. She was talking about the
idea that the oneoff tariff price
increase can take some time to
materialize. and she called back to um
the research paper that they're going to
be discussing at the Boston Fed about
the 2018 tariffs and this idea that even
those which were you know looking back
fairly straightforward took months to
actually work their way through the
economy. Now we're in a place where the
tariffs you know they've been on and
then they're off and there's some
discussion about what's going to happen
now. It seems likely that you could see
that those would take even longer to
work their way through. I should just
say we are going to be releasing a
special episode of the podcast where we
talk to a lot of the researchers who are
presenting at this Boston Fed
conference. So look out for that. And
also if you're interested the Boston Fed
will actually be live streaming this
conference so you can follow along in
real time on Friday and Saturday and
listen to all the papers actually get
discussed. Yeah, all the PDFs are there.
And so that's what Tracy and I are going
to be doing on Friday and Saturday.
We're going to be listening to speakers.
We're going to be reading their PDFs.
She can virtually join with us, read all
the PDFs yourself and uh talk about them
in the Discord with us.
>> We should actually outsource some of our
work and just ask people read this paper
and then tell us what questions we
should ask about it. No, no, no.
>> That's what you had GPTs for.
>> Yeah. All right. Well, we'll be in a
both of us are probably going to be in a
Boston bar in the next day or so eating
beans and reading research papers. So,
that's what we'll be doing. Uh, shall we
leave it there for now?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our
producers, Kerman Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman, Dashel Bennett at Dashbot, and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots,
where we have the daily newsletter and
all of our episodes, and you can chat
about all these topics 247 in our
Discord, discord.gg/odlots.
[music]
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we go to regional Fed conferences,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite podcast [music]
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
[music]
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[music]